*Content in this syllabus is subject to change*

# CIS 640 - Software Testing

## Spring 2022 Syllabus

{{% notice info %}}
**All emails** for the course should be sent to **[cis640help@KSUemailProd.onmicrosoft.com](mailto:cis640help@KSUemailProd.onmicrosoft.com?subject=CIS%20640%20Help)** (sorry I know it’s a long address). This will contact the professors and ALL the TAs for the course and guarantee the fastest response time if contacting via email <u>(please allow one full business day for response)</u>. You are welcome to send emails that may contain more sensitive information directly to intended recipients.

Communication can also be done through **Microsoft Teams** or **Discord**.  If you have not been invited to join the team for the course, please let any of us know and we will get you added.  Please keep in mind that the Discord channel is mostly student-run.  I will respond there, but I generally prefer MS Teams for chat communications.
{{% /notice %}}

### Contact

**Professor:** Josh Weese – [weeser@ksu.edu](mailto:weeser@ksu.edu)  

- **Office:** 2214 Engineering Hall (DUE)  
- **Phone:** Office - (785) 317-3353  
- **Office  Hours:** See my [calendar](http://weeser.net/calendar/).     
    - **Want  to meet with me? https://calendly.com/weeser**  

**GTA:** Nolan Brubaker

- **Email:** [ncbrubaker@ksu.edu](mailto:efaust@ksu.edu)
- **Office Hours:** TDB

<br/>

{{% notice info %}}
I will be going on paternity leave shortly after Spring break to welcome my second son into the world (woot!).  During my absence, Nolan will be the primary point of contact for the course with assistance from Bud LaVezzi.  These details may change, but I will have more concrete details as we get closer to spring break. Due to going on parental leave and the current COVID situation, this course will be quite fluid this semester, more-so than previous years.  If I can make this course better for you or the class at anytime, please let me know. -Josh
{{% /notice %}}

### Required Texts 

- “Software Testing 2nd Edition” by Ron Pattn. **ISBN 0-672-32798-8** *(free online, see below)*
- “Lessons Learned in Software Testing” by Cem Kaner, James Bach, and Bret Pettichord. **ISBN 978-0-471-08112-8** *(free online, see below)*

### Optional Reading

These are books I have found to be interesting and/or useful:

- “Pragmatic Software Testing” by Rex Black. **ISBN 978-0-470-12790-2** 
- “Introduction to Software Testing 2nd Edition” by Paul Ammann and Jeff Offutt. **ISBN 978-1-107-17201-2**

### Accessing Books

Both required books (And some other optional books) are available through O'Reily **online for free**. This should be able to be accessed using your K-State email. Sign into K-State libraries and go to these links:

- [Lessons Learned in Software Testing](https://k-state-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/primo-explore/fulldisplay?docid=01KSU_ALMA51308587580002401&context=U&vid=NewUI&lang=en_US)
- [Software Testing 2nd Edition ](https://k-state-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/primo-explore/fulldisplay?docid=01KSU_ALMA51308309030002401&context=U&vid=NewUI&lang=en_US) 
- [Pragmatic Software Testing](https://k-state-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/primo-explore/fulldisplay?docid=01KSU_ALMA51308548800002401&context=U&vid=NewUI&lang=en_US)

You should see, under the View section, a link for getting the full text. That will take you to a new site that may ask you again for your K-State email (may have to use k-state.edu instead of ksu.edu), but once you enter that, it should bring you to the full e-book. On this site ([https://www.safaribooksonline.com](https://www.safaribooksonline.com)) you can also find one of the optional books, Pragmatic Software Testing, for free as well.  You will also find more software testing/QA books on this website that are freely available for you if you are interested.

### Course Overview

Due to the nature of software, there is never only one correct way to assure its quality in testing.  As such, this course will provide some insight to how a software tester should think and go about testing. The course will give a survey of various software testing methodologies, strategies, and practices to enable the correct mindset and techniques for testing software. This course will also provide an overview of some testing technologies used for automation of the testing process. This course does **not** include a significant amount of programming/development.  Instead, this course will leverage your comprehension of software development and design to properly put software testing theories and tools into practice. A significant portion of this course relies on class engagement (in-person or digitally) to accomplish the course objectives.

### Course Objectives

- Understand what software testing entails 
    - and what the role of a software tester involves
- Learn the differences between common testing methodologies and techniques
- Apply software testing techniques in different software development life cycles
- Document, plan, and report the full testing process
- Gain familiarity with automated testing tools/frameworks

### Major Course Topics

- Black-box vs white-box testing
- Coverage
- Static vs Dynamic testing
- Roles of a software tester
- Software Development Life Cycle
- Software Testing Life Cycle
- Test planning and documentation
- Testing methodologies, such as Context-driven testing and usability testing
- Test driven development
- Automated testing tools (ex: unit testing, deployment, etc.) 

## Course Structure

This course will have a hybrid delivery.  All lectures will be live recorded along with the on-campus students.  These recordings will be available after class the same day for students who are taking this class only online.  Most interactive discussion will happen on Canvas to accommodate and involve students who are online only and those who are unable to come to class due to COVID.  Semester projects will also be conducted in this hybrid manner. 

### Assignments

*Assignments are to be completed without any collaboration with classmates or other outside help unless otherwise stated. Any unauthorized aid may result in a 0 for the assignment or an XF for the course and a report submitted to the Academic Honor Council.* 

#### Grading

- 15% - Participation/Discussions
- 35% - Exams
- 20% - Homework
- 30% - Group projects

Letter grades will be assigned following the standard scale:

90% - 100% - A; 80% - 89.99% - B; 70% - 79.99% - C; 60% - 69.99% - D; 00% - 59.99% - F 

#### Late Work

Every student should strive to turn in work on time. **Late work will receive penalty of 10% of the possible points for each day it is late**. This is to a maximum of 3 days. Assignments 3 days past the due date will not be accepted. Note that this is a **maximum** NOT a minimum. This means that some assignments will not be accepted late. This distinction will be made through canvas and announced in class on an assignment basis. Missed class attendance cannot be made up. 

#### Attendance and Participation in Class Activities

Some classes will include activities intended to be completed in class (for on-campus students) that will help illustrate the topic of the day. Collaborating and communicating with others in the class is a large part of these activities and is encouraged. Participating in each of these activities is key to learning, so failing to attend class or participate in the activities/discussions online will result in no points. 

Excused absences (for work done in class or extensions otherwise) will only be given in 2 situations:

- You are absent due to a **university activity** or **interviews** and have given the instructor **prior notice** of the absence. Excuses after the absence will not be accepted, even for university activities, unless your situation has you indisposed.
- You have a “major life event” that prevents you from participating in class, such as an illness or family emergency. Please inform us ASAP when anything like this occurs in order to make arrangements for getting caught back up.
- Please follow University guidelines for COVID isolation/quarantine.  COVID absences are currently not verified with student life.  Please let me know if you are in isolation/quarantine due to COVID symptoms, a positive COVID test, or have came in contact with someone who has.

#### Homework Assignments/Projects

There are some programming and written assignments given from time to time that must be completed outside of class. It is acceptable to communicate with other students about the concepts in the assignment if you do not understand it, but you should not discuss the details of how the assignment should be completed. Your submission should be your own work, or the work of your small group if allowed by the instructor. ***When in doubt, ask!\***

#### Online Students

This course is taught on campus, but also has an online section for distance students. Lectures will be recorded live during the in-person section of the course. These recordings will be automatically uploaded after class is done. The recordings are available for online and on-campus students. For online students, most in-class activities will be substituted with an online discussion. These will be available the same day the recordings are made. All discussions/in-class work will be due before the next class period unless listed otherwise. Details/instructions will be given for each topic. Most assignments/homework will be identical to the on-campus section.

## Subject to Change

The details in this syllabus are not set in stone. Due to the flexible nature of this class, adjustments may need to be made as the semester progresses, though they will be kept to a minimum. If any changes occur, the changes will be posted on the K-State Canvas page for this course and emailed to all students.

## Safe Zone Statement

I am part of the SafeZone community network of trained K-State  faculty/staff/students who are available to listen and support you. As a SafeZone Ally, I can help you connect with resources on campus to  address problems you face that interfere with your academic success,  particularly issues of sexual violence, hateful acts, or concerns faced  by individuals due to sexual orientation/gender identity. My goal is to  help you be successful and to maintain a safe and equitable campus.

### Academic Honesty 

Kansas State University has an Honor and Integrity System based on  personal integrity, which is presumed to be sufficient assurance that,  in academic matters, one’s work is performed honestly and without  unauthorized assistance. Undergraduate and graduate students, by  registration, acknowledge the jurisdiction of the Honor and Integrity  System. The policies and procedures of the [Honor and Integrity System](https://www.k-state.edu/honor/) apply to all full and part-time students enrolled in undergraduate and  graduate courses on-campus, off-campus, and via distance learning. A  component vital to the Honor and Integrity System is the inclusion of  the Honor Pledge which applies to all assignments, examinations, or  other course work undertaken by students. The Honor Pledge is implied,  whether or not it is stated: “On my honor, as a student, I have neither  given nor received unauthorized aid on this academic work.” A grade of  XF can result from a breach of academic honesty. The F indicates failure in the course; the X indicates the reason is an Honor Pledge violation.

**For this course, a violation of the Honor Pledge will result  in sanctions such as a 0 on the assignment or an XF in the course,  depending on severity. Actively seeking unauthorized aid, such as  posting lab assignments on sites such as Chegg or StackOverflow or  asking another person to complete your work, even if unsuccessful, will  result in an immediate XF in the course.**

{{% include "themes/ksucs-hugo-theme/static/files/syllabus-no-copyright-no-honesty.md" %}}

## Copyright Notification 

Copyright 2022 (Joshua L. Weese) as to this syllabus and all lectures. During this course students are prohibited from selling notes to or  being paid  for taking notes by any person or commercial firm without  the express  written permission of the professor teaching this course.  In addition,  students in this class are not authorized to provide class notes or  other class-related materials to any other person or entity,  other than  sharing them directly with another student taking the class  for purposes of studying, without prior written permission from the  professor  teaching this course. The digital materials included here  come with the legal permissions and releases of the copyright holders.   These course materials should be used for educational purposes only; the contents should not be distributed electronically or otherwise beyond  the confines of this online course.  The URLs listed here do not suggest endorsement of either the site owners or the contents found at the  sites.  Likewise, mentioned brands (products and services) do not suggest endorsement.  Students own copyright to what they create.